[Music]
the first man-made object to orbit the
Earth was Sputnik 1 which blasted off on
October 4th 1957 in the decades since
we've launched thousands of additional
satellites the modern world would surely
grind to a halt without them but now
there are so many up there that we might
literally be running out of space you
see it turns out that there are only so
many places you can put a satellite and
have it stay where you want it to be if
a satellite is too low it'll simply fall
from the sky too high and it will
gradually drift into deep space
satellites can still orbit quite far
from the Earth's surface but the higher
up they go the more fuel needs to be
spent getting them up there it is also
much more difficult to repair a
satellite the farther away it is this
leads to another problem I'll get into
later global positioning system or GPS
satellites and others that need to
remain over a specific part of the
Earth's surface have to be launched at
very specific altitudes these are called
geosynchronous or geostationary orbits
and they're the most difficult kind to
achieve this is partly because they are
extra vulnerable to what scientists call
longitudinal drift
basically there are two completely
stable positions and two completely
unstable ones anything orbiting the
Earth will gravitate toward the two
stable orbits the further from a stable
orbit the satellite is the more effort
has to be put into keeping it there
there's also the fact that any object in
space is getting tugged on by the
gravity of every other object in space
they aren't going to get yanked out of
orbit all at once but can gradually get
nudged out of place this can eventually
lead to them drifting out of orbit
entirely worst case they might end up
colliding with another satellite with so
many in orbit keeping them all from
slamming into each other is a full-time
job it's a test that gets more difficult
every passing year as NASA openly admits
if you want proof all you have to do is
look at the 2009 satellite collision
oversight
birria on february 10th an abandoned
Russian satellite called cosmos 22:51
plowed into the side of an American
satellite as they passed over northern
Siberia the impact shredded both
spacecrafts and sent a cloud of debris
hurtling through space at incredible
speed luckily none of the fragments did
any damage unfortunately more than half
of them are still whirling through space
and posing a hazard to future missions
broken or abandoned satellites like
cosmos 22:51
are a huge threat to the ones that are
still functioning they can drift or get
knocked out of orbit very easily and we
have no way of correcting their course
they're also not the only space junk
swirling around in the big black and
they aren't the most dangerous either at
least complete satellites are easy to
keep track of the same isn't always true
for the debris left behind by satellite
launches and other missions a piece of
space garbage just four inches across is
enough to rip most satellites apart for
reference
that's a hunk of metal only slightly
longer than four quarters lined up in a
row as of May 2019 there were around
23,000 objects of that size are larger
even tinier pieces can still do major
damage to satellites and are much harder
to track the very smallest are almost
impossible to detect and can still cause
serious harm if they hit something in
just the right spot the absolute worst
case scenario is what scientists call
the Kessler effect thought of in 1978 by
NASA scientist Donald J Kessler the
Kessler effect is basically the domino
effect in space
imagine a collision like the one I
mentioned earlier where two satellites
smashed together and break into
thousands of pieces now picture that one
of those pieces hits another satellite
that satellite breaks into more pieces
which hit more satellites the longer
this cycle continues the more satellites
get wiped out and the more likely it is
that another satellite will get knocked
out of the sky
works of fiction like to present the
Kessler effect in almost apocalyptic
terms movies like 2013's gravity
imagined a nightmare scenario where all
of the world's satellites and space
stations are knocked out in a single day
in reality this is the kind of thing
that plays out over decades and nobody's
quite sure how serious who would
actually be even if the Kessler effect
comes true you'll probably be able to
stream bright side videos on your laptop
at Starbucks it would still be the
biggest disaster in the history of space
travel but wouldn't exactly cause a
metallic force field around the planet
Earth but what if it did what would the
world be like if all our satellites were
wiped out at once tell me what you think
in the comments below
Rockets are still going to blast off
either way but the debris would continue
to be a massive hazard to future
launches low orbiting satellites would
be especially vulnerable the
International Space Station would
probably remain intact but it may need
to be abandoned it wouldn't be the end
of the world but the effects could end
up being felt for generations to come
right now there are a few objects making
scientists nervous one notable example
is the European Space Agency's enormous
and abandoned and visit satellite not
only is it the largest satellite ever
built but it's in one of the busiest
regions of Earth's orbit
lucky for us people are keeping an eye
on it just in case anything gets too
close a full-scale disaster is unlikely
so you can rest easy knowing that you
aren't going to wake up one morning and
find out that the internet stopped
existing still the threat of satellite
collisions is very real and will only
get worse as we launch more and more
objects into orbit even if we never see
another serious crash like what happened
in 2009 the gathering space junk will
continue to restrict future satellite
launches this is a big problem and will
only get worse as our need for
satellites continues to grow the good
news is that scientists are aware of
this problem and are taking steps to
reduce the amount of space junk we
going forward modern satellites usually
won't get the green light until there's
a plan for how to get rid of them often
this means that the satellite needs to
be capable of entering what's known as a
junk or disposal orbit sometimes this
requires pushing it out so far into
space that the odds of a crash dropped
to basically nothing another option is
to lower the satellite so that it gets
pulled in by the Earth's gravity
eventually it will fall through the
atmosphere and burn up like a meteor if
that sounds like the opposite of safely
throwing something away don't worry even
the biggest satellites ever built aren't
nearly enough to reach the ground
without burning away into nothing
another suggested solution would be to
place unwanted satellites so they will
be yanked out of orbit by the Sun or
moon those are all good ways to reduce
future waste but won't do much to get
rid of what's already out there for that
we need to turn to more creative
solutions my personal favorite is the
laser bro mainly because it's just
really really cool this broom is exactly
what it sounds like a big laser beam
designed to push things out of the way
of nearby spacecraft its main targets
would be objects between a quarter-inch
and four inches in size the laser
wouldn't destroy the garbage completely
instead it would burn away portions of
the object in a way that causes its
orbit to become unstable the space junk
then falls into the atmosphere and burns
up just like before the laser broom
sounds like something out of science
fiction and technically still is still
NASA research from 2011 indicated the
concept could work in practice
the main hurdle is the price tag one
prediction from the 1990s estimated that
the lasers would cost around five
hundred million dollars that sounds like
a lot of money to me but it's only a
small fraction of NASA's annual budget
personally I think it's a small price to
pay for space lasers and I guess it's
worth it to clean all the junk out of
orbit but come on who doesn't like space
lasers hey if you learn something new
today
they give the video a like and share it
with a friend
and here are some other cool videos I
think you'll enjoy just click to the
left or right and remember stay on the
bright side of life